Excorporate provides Exchange integration for Emacs.

To create a connection to a web service:

M-x excorporate

Excorporate will prompt for an email address that it will use to
automatically discover settings.  Then it will connect to two
separate hosts: the autodiscovery host and the web service host, so
you may be prompted for your credentials twice.

You should see a message indicating that the connection is ready
either in the minibuffer or failing that in the *Messages* buffer.

Finally, run M-x calendar, and press 'e' to show today's meetings.

Please try autodiscovery first and report issues not yet listed
below.  When autodiscovery works it is very convenient; the goal is
to make it work for as many users as possible.

If autodiscovery fails, customize `excorporate-configuration' to
skip autodiscovery.

Autodiscovery will fail if:

- Excorporate is accessing the server through a proxy (Emacs
  bug#10).

- The server is not configured to support autodiscovery.

- The email address is at a different domain than the server, e.g.,
  user@domain1.com, autodiscover.domain2.com.

- Authentication is Kerberos/GSSAPI.

Excorporate does know about the special case where the mail address
is at a subdomain, e.g., user@sub.domain.com, and the server is at
the main domain, e.g., autodiscover.domain.com.  Autodiscovery will
work in that case.

Excorporate must be loaded before any other package that requires
`soap-client'.  The version of `soap-client' that Excorporate
bundles is backward compatible.

Acknowledgments:

Alexandru Harsanyi <AlexHarsanyi@gmail.com> provided help and
guidance on how to extend soap-client.el's WSDL and XSD handling,
enabling support for the full Exchange Web Services API.

Alex Luccisano <casual.lexicon@gmail.com> tested early versions of
this library against a corporate installation of Exchange and
provided feedback.

Jon Miller <jonebird@gmail.com> tested against Exchange 2013 and
provided feedback.  Jon also tracked down and reported a bad
interaction with other packages that require soap-client.

Nicolas Lamirault <nicolas.lamirault@gmail.com> tested the
autodiscovery feature and provided feedback.

Trey Jackson <bigfaceworm@gmail.com> confirmed autodiscovery worked
for him.

Joakim Verona <joakim@verona.se> tested autodiscovery in a
Kerberos/GSSAPI environment and provided feedback.
